The Joe Rogan experience.
What is disturbing both of you most about what's going on right now?
Well, I think we'd love to see a third way.
So they're the pre-moderns as it were, who have very traditionalist,
conservative.
To get approach, try to the sucker up close to you. Sorry. Sorry about that.
No worries. Yeah.
Perfect. The,
the pre-moderns who have a very traditional conservative approach to gender
roles, to sex, to relationship. And, uh,
there are a lot of us in the modern world who would reject a lot of that.
And then there, there are the post-moderns who wanna throw out everything,
wanna throw out everything that evolution handed us, you, and in the meantime,
pretend that it didn't happen, right?
Pretend that it's not even based on reality. And there is a there's a third way.
And, you know, maybe we need to call it modern as opposed to pre or post-modern,
but, uh, there's, there's a third way to navigate what evolutionary is,
what evolution has given us, what we can change,
what we can't change and how to actually recover some of,
you know,
the sexiness and sex and the love and love and the romance and romance, and,
you know, understand that human beings are what we are from not just
a hundred years back,
but 1,010 thousand and a hundred million years back we've had sex.
Since you both taught at a university level,
you you've been around these students and you you've seen this sort of
post-modernist movement gain steam. What,
what do you think is the cause of it? Like what,
what is the reason why people are projecting this sort of
distorted idea that there's no differences between men and women and that all
the differences in the genders or all it's all propaganda or cultural or.
So I,
I think it actually arises from a relatively simple
cause that we all detect there's something not right about what we've been
taught.
We detect there's something not right about the way civilization is structured.
We can tell that there's nobody really at the helm and you have a lot of people
who are faced with some issue that to them is incredibly glaring.
Something that just absolutely needs to be solved.
And so what they do is they look at that issue and they say,
what would we have to,
what would we have to say in order for that issue to be fully addressed?
And the problem is that we're dealing with a complex system.
And if you optimize for any one solution,
you cause a catastrophe across all of the other things that it's connected to.
And if you're not focused on those unintended consequences,
you tend not to understand why people are resistant to your solution.
So for example,
let's deal with the transgender issue for the transgender
community. And I don't, you know, this is not a monolith, the community.
I actually know quite a number of people within it who have a heterodox
position, but in general,
there's a sense that it is disrespectful,
not to simply recognize anybody who has decided to transition as a
full fledged member of the sex to which they have moved.
That seems right. And if you are focused on, uh,
the humanitarian side of the question, maybe it even is right,
but the problem is,
if you say a person who identifies as a particular
sex is that sex suddenly you've actually caused a whole bunch
of consequences that you weren't thinking of over in a biology class, over,
uh, in the prison system. I mean, is it true that somebody who says that they,
our female gets to go to a women's prison? Do we want to put, uh,
violent sex offenders in a women's prison because they declare themselves to be
female.
So not tracking the consequences that were not in your view when you
decided on a particular solution is the reason that so many people have signed
up for these really absurd notions.
And part of what I hope we will get to today is that
there is a,
a principle at the core of understanding all complex adaptive systems,
and it is diminishing returns and diminishing returns sounds kind of arcane. Uh,
it has too close an association with economics where it was first outlined.
Um, but the message of diminishing returns is that you can very often
get 90% of a solution that you want and not disrupt other
things unduly.
But if you say I want a hundred percent of the solution to this problem, 'em,
you'll cause a catastrophe.
So getting people to realize don't shoot for the utopia in which the problem
you're talking about is 100% solved. If you can accept a 90% solution,
then you can have a whole bunch of other things that you don't even realize
you're using in.
Defensive people. That would try to go for a hundred percent though. Isn't it?
One of those things where like you, if you would negotiate, you would,
if you want a hundred dollars, you ask for 150.
Unfortunately. I mean, I think you're identifying something,
correct that in part, the positions that we hear, um,
being deployed are not an honest reflection of the beliefs of many
of the people who are espousing them. They're a negotiating to acting,
but we can't do that with biology. You can't negotiate with biology.
Biology is what it is.
And then we can talk about which parts of it are amenable to being changed.
And as Heather pointed out,
we're not advocating for a return to some traditional way of interacting between
the sexes. We're advocating for a, uh, an enlightened way that, uh,
takes advantage of the freedoms. We have that our ancestors didn't and, um,
tries to navigate the hazards that we're stuck with. Um,
so you can't, you can't, uh, negotiate with biology.
You're really ought to listen to what it is that nature is telling you,
and then say, all right, what does that leave open? Where can we shift things?
But if you're gonna require that we lie about what's true, biologically,
in order to navigate to a solution, I guarantee you,
it will be unstable in the end. Yeah.
The, the Zeit guys to begun to such nonsense as
chromosomes exist on a continuum, you know,
there are X chroromosomes and they are Y chromosomes. I haven't heard that one.
Um, one of our children just heard that at his school.
What did they mean by, on a continuum.
Who even knows? I.
I don't think they meant anything.
I think what they intended to do was carve out freedom from a BI ological
truth. Mmhmm. And so if you say ch chromosomes are on a continuum,
then it's very hard to disagree with that because it doesn't mean anything that
we can unpack. Well.
I would say it's actually really easy to disagree with it and say, no, you know,
gamades, aren't on a continuum. Sperm is sperm and eggs or eggs. Sorry,
discreete two of 'em right. Chromosomes also not on a continuum,
at least in mammals sex. Yeah. A continuum.
Their intersex is real, but it's strongly bimodal, right?
There's there are males and there are females and there are a few people it's
rare,
but real that there are intermediate phenotypes and gender is even
more of a continuum, but still strongly bimodal.
Have you folks heard about that new crayfish that there battling in Europe,
there's a giant crayfish in Europe, that's female and female only,
and essentially is a clone. They, they reproduce by cloning,
so they don't need a male partner and uh,
they're going crazy and there's a lot of, of them them.
So great. First two sentences there,
it sounded like there was a giant crayfish to send ending on Europe.
It was a female and she's mad.
She's. <laugh>, she's tired. All these lobster dinners. So.
Yeahs, no it's and that's gonna work for a while. Right?
And like asexuality has actually evolved in a few lineages,
a few verttete lineages.
There's some lizards that are asexual and it's all females and it goes great
until the environment changes, right? Because if you're cloning yourself, you,
your children are gonna experience exactly are gonna be exactly the same thing
that you were. So if you were a good fit for your environment,
the next environment better be the same or else your kids aren't gonna be a good
fit. So, right. My feeling is that crayfish. I haven't followed the story a lot,
but that crayfish is gonna do terrifically moving into exactly the landscapes
that it first mutated into existence in. And if you change the landscape of it,
it's gonna stop.
Doing so. Well. I think they just farm it for food if it's tasty. Yeah,
no doubt. We don't doubt have to worry about them. Breeding,
just get a ton of 'em together, crayfish or delicious. They are delicious.
Right. This is a good tasting variety. <laugh> it's free food. Yeah. You know,
I mean, it's kind of crazy. That's right.
So Heather and I were talking before the podcast started about,
I think a very important point when it comes to a lot of these, uh,
either progressive or right wing issues is that people tend to be extremely
tribal. And what they're really concerned with is winning. They,
it becomes a competition of us versus them.
It becomes our side versus their side,
and they tend to exploit weaknesses and then attack to score points
and all ideas of being honest, intellectually,
or looking at things objectively kind of go out the window.
You ignore facts that diminish your position or your team's position
and highlight things. Even if they're not real,
that would diminish the other side's position.
This is a real problem that humans have with arguments with, with,
with being tribal, with being on different sides. I mean, we see it,
we forget about tribes. We see it with people where,
when there's a certain time, when you see people arguing,
there's a certain point where the argument has deteriorated to a competition and
it's no longer about what you're actually discussing. It's about who can win.
Yeah. So, and this is what science is for. Yes.
Yeah. Well.
This has science ought to be indifferent when it's done well. It,
it is indifferent to who's the stronger team.
It should really just tell you what's true. And in fact,
the reason to use science is to correct for biases.
Um, but so Eric and Heather and I have a, uh,
a phrase that is just shorthand for something which is, um,
bad faith changes, everything.
There's a lot you can do in discussion with people,
with whom you disagree,
as long as you are on the same page to a large extent. Yes.
And what you're describing is what happens when that system breaks down and
people perceive themselves as needing to win against the enemy rather than on
a team that is trying to navigate to what is true or what is the most desirable
outcome with respect to values that we all share or something like that.
So what you're describing is a very common state.
It is a lower,
less capable state than a good faith environment where people who may disagree,
intensely agree on the basic rules and the desirability of figuring out what's
true. And so maybe that part of what uh,
we can do here is try to point to where the good faith conversation
can get to that.
The bad faith conversation is incapable of getting to the value. Really.
Yeah. I think that's, that's a giant point. It really is. And it's a, I mean,
it's really something that I would hope more people would adopt going into the
future.
Stop connecting yourself to these ideas and just let these ideas exist on their
own and examine them objectively and rely on science,
rely on actual science to formulate your,
when you're talking about biological issues. And.
When I say science is the answer to this,
it's not necessarily that we should accept.
No one should accept the findings of science just at, at face value.
But a scientific approach is I've got this idea what would have to be
true if that were true and how can I possibly prove it wrong?
And you work harder and harder and harder to prove it wrong. And if you can't,
then you have greater and greater and greater confidence that maybe it's right.
And so this, this is what we don't see in bad.
Faith arguments is no one is trying to prove themselves wrong. And that's,
I mean, that sounds backwards the first time you, you hear it,
but if you try to actually demonstrate that your own cherished beliefs are
wrong, wrong, and you can't do it,
you have pretty good confidence at the end of that. And there is no actual end,
but the longer you've gone,
you have pretty good confidence that actually I'm probably seeing something real
here. I've asked myself, I've asked my friends,
I've asked my enemies is this thing. Right? And you know,
in an actual formal scientific setting, you do an experiment. You,
you run the data and you, you do the analysis, but is it right? Or is it not?
Let's see if I can prove it's not, even though I really think it is.
Really. So you also get a test, you get something, uh,
there's a bonus that comes with it, which is, I don't know what else to say.
It's super awesome. Which is, if you've tried to take your cherished idea,
some hypothesis that you've come up with and you've tried, right.
16 different ways to show that it's wrong and you keep failing. Well,
every one of those things you did to see whether what you thought was true is
actually false. Now prepares you when somebody now challenges you and they say,
oh, but you haven't thought of this. Well, you have,
you've been through it 16 different ways and that you,
the ability to navigate almost anything that's thrown at you because, uh,
you have taken on the role of being your own harshest critic in order to make
sure that what's left at the end of that process is really robust.
The other thing, um, that I,
I want to insert here is that I think a,
I don't wanna be put in the position of defending everything that's been
published in the scientific literature as true, because it looks like science.
A lot of it isn't a lot of what's published in the scientific literature is not
valid. The methodology does not establish what people claim it does.
And that's a big hazard for, for people like Heather and myself,
because you have to sort the wheat from the chaf in order to figure out what to
defend and what to be agnostic about. Um,
but I do think those of us who more or less get the story
of what let's say human sexuality is about at a scientific level.
And there's still a lot of mystery,
but there's an awful lot that those of us who have studied it are in agreement
about,
and civilization is not yet on the same page with those of us who have lived,
looked at it. Scientifically, one thing we have failed to do,
I think is to articulate what you will get in exchange
for signing up for a scientific worldview on this topic.
People do not realize that a scientific worldview is actually the thing
that empowers you to navigate your,
your own love life in an intelligent way. It will.
Let you. And it's a lot more fun than it sounds when you say it that way.
Yeah, it it's. Well, you know,
they're all of these famous arguments about unweaving the rainbow or,
you know, somebody challenged Fineman that, um, he,
he was the kind of guy who would take part a flower and destroy its beauty in
order to figure out how it worked and find this is the trope.
Science will destroy beauty, right? And it's not true. No, it's not true.
You will get a lot of value.
You will waste less of your time on people that you shouldn't be interested in.
If you understand what game they're playing, even if they don't understand it,